docs/runbooks/streaming-operations.md, before:

# Streaming Operations Runbook

This runbook codifies day-two procedures for AppHub's streaming stack (Redpanda, Flink, and the timestore streaming runtime). It captures startup order, recovery flows, and sizing guidance so on-call engineers can restore service quickly.

## Startup Order

1. **Redpanda** – start the broker before any downstream consumers.
   - Docker Compose: `docker compose -f docker/demo-stack.compose.yml up -d redpanda redpanda-init`
   - Minikube: `kubectl apply -k infra/minikube && kubectl rollout status statefulset/apphub-redpanda -n apphub-system`
   - Verify metrics on `http://<broker-host>:9644/metrics` and health via `rpk cluster info`.
2. **Flink** – launch the JobManager/TaskManagers after Redpanda reports healthy.
   - Compose: `docker compose ... up -d flink-jobmanager flink-taskmanager`
   - Minikube: `kubectl rollout status deployment/apphub-flink-jobmanager -n apphub-system`
   - Confirm `/v1/cluster/health` returns `HEALTHY` and `/metrics` exposes checkpoint gauges.
3. **Timestore** – boot the API, then enable streaming batchers/hot buffer.
   - `npm run dev --workspace @apphub/timestore`
   - Check `/streaming/status` and `/ready` for state `ready`.
4. **Core** – once the above are green, start `npm run dev --workspace @apphub/core` and validate `/readyz` replies with status `ready`.
5. **Smoke check** – run `npm run runSmoke --workspace @apphub/tests` or `apps/cli/bin/apphub status` to confirm streaming readiness.

## Failure Recovery

### Broker outage (Redpanda)

1. Alert: `vectorized_cluster_health_status` or `apphub_streaming_backlog_seconds` will fire (`PagerDuty` + `#apphub-ops`).
2. Inspect broker state: `kubectl logs statefulset/apphub-redpanda -n apphub-system` or `docker logs redpanda`.
3. If the pod crashed, restart sequentially (`kubectl rollout restart statefulset/apphub-redpanda`). Wait for leadership to stabilise (`rpk cluster info`).
4. After recovery, ensure `/streaming/status` reports `broker.reachable=true` and backlog gauges fall towards zero.
5. If data loss suspected, trigger partition reassignment or restore from the latest S3 snapshot (see `docs/redpanda.md#operational-checklist`).

### Micro-batcher failures

1. Alert: `timestore_streaming_flush_duration_seconds` > p95 or connectors stuck (`Streaming micro-batchers degraded`).
2. Check Timestore logs for connector errors (`npm run dev --workspace @apphub/timestore` logs or `journalctl` in prod).
3. Flush in-flight windows by restarting the streaming workers (`pkill -f timestore && npm run dev --workspace @apphub/timestore`) or redeploying the pod (`kubectl rollout restart deployment/apphub-timestore -n apphub-system`).
4. Confirm `apps/cli status` shows `batchers: N/N running` and backlog gauges decay.

### Flink checkpoint restore

1. Alert: `flink_jobmanager_completed_checkpoints_total` stalls or `flink_checkpoint_failed_total` spikes.
2. Trigger savepoint for inspection (if JobManager reachable):
   ```bash
   curl -X POST "$APPHUB_FLINK_REST_URL/jobs/<jobId>/savepoints" \
     -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
     -d '{"target-directory": "s3://apphub-flink-checkpoints/savepoints"}'
   ```
3. Restart job from last successful checkpoint or savepoint:
   ```bash
   flink run-application \
     --target kubernetes-application \
     --fromSavepoint s3://apphub-flink-checkpoints/savepoints/<id> \
     -Dkubernetes.cluster-id=apphub-flink \
     gs://apphub-streaming-jobs/tumbling-window.jar
   ```
4. After restart, watch `/streaming/status` (`hotBuffer.state`) and `timestore_streaming_backlog_seconds` to ensure backlog clears.

## Capacity Planning

Track these signals to resize streaming components:

- **Topic lag** – `timestore_streaming_backlog_seconds` > 120s (add batchers) or `vectorized_kafka_partition_under_replicated` (scale brokers).
- **Flush throughput** – `timestore_streaming_flush_duration_seconds` and `timestore_streaming_flush_rows` (increase batch parallelism or window size).
- **Hot buffer footprint** – `timestore_streaming_hot_buffer_rows` and `timestore_streaming_hot_buffer_staleness_seconds` (tune `maxTotalRows`, `retentionSeconds`).
- **Flink checkpoints** – `flink_jobmanager_job_last_checkpoint_duration` and `flink_jobmanager_checkpoint_failed_total` (scale TaskManagers or widen checkpoint interval).

Reassess quotas monthly or after onboarding a workload that emits >50k events/minute. Update `TIMESTORE_STREAMING_BATCHERS` window sizes and Redpanda retention accordingly.

Commit message:

feat(streaming): wire mirrors end-to-end and demos (#152)
* feat(streaming): enable full mirror stack

* fix(demo): adjust streaming demo stack mounts

---------

Co-authored-by: Benedikt Wimmer <bene@Mac.home>

docs/runbooks/streaming-operations.md, after:

# Streaming Operations Runbook

This runbook codifies day-two procedures for AppHub's streaming stack (Redpanda, Flink, and the timestore streaming runtime). It captures startup order, recovery flows, and sizing guidance so on-call engineers can restore service quickly.

## Startup Order

1. **Redpanda** – start the broker before any downstream consumers.
   - Docker Compose: `docker compose -f docker/demo-stack.compose.yml up -d redpanda redpanda-init`
   - Minikube: `kubectl apply -k infra/minikube && kubectl rollout status statefulset/apphub-redpanda -n apphub-system`
   - Verify metrics on `http://<broker-host>:9644/metrics` and health via `rpk cluster info`.
2. **Flink** – launch the JobManager/TaskManagers after Redpanda reports healthy.
   - Compose: `docker compose ... up -d flink-jobmanager flink-taskmanager`
   - Minikube: `kubectl rollout status deployment/apphub-flink-jobmanager -n apphub-system`
   - Confirm `/v1/cluster/health` returns `HEALTHY` and `/metrics` exposes checkpoint gauges.
3. **Timestore** – boot the API, then enable streaming batchers/hot buffer.
   - `npm run dev --workspace @apphub/timestore`
   - Check `/streaming/status` and `/ready` for state `ready`.
4. **Core** – once the above are green, start `npm run dev --workspace @apphub/core` and validate `/readyz` replies with status `ready`.
5. **Smoke check** – run `npm run runSmoke --workspace @apphub/tests` or `apps/cli/bin/apphub status` to confirm streaming readiness.

## Feature Toggles & Verification

1. Ensure Redpanda topics exist: `rpk topic list | grep apphub.` should return `apphub.workflows.events`, `apphub.workflows.runs`, `apphub.jobs.runs`, `apphub.ingestion.telemetry`, and `apphub.core.events`.
2. Flip producer mirrors via env vars / config:
   - `APPHUB_STREAM_MIRROR_WORKFLOW_RUNS`
   - `APPHUB_STREAM_MIRROR_WORKFLOW_EVENTS`
   - `APPHUB_STREAM_MIRROR_JOB_RUNS`
   - `APPHUB_STREAM_MIRROR_INGESTION`
   - `APPHUB_STREAM_MIRROR_CORE_EVENTS`
3. Redeploy Core so the new flags take effect. On startup Core checks Kafka connectivity and logs warnings if the broker or topics are missing.
4. Verify `/readyz` (or `apphub status`) shows the mirrors enabled and review the `publisher` block for recent success/failure timestamps.
5. Confirm Timestore ingests mirrored datasets by querying:
   ```bash
   curl "$TIMESTORE_URL/streaming/status" | jq '.hotBuffer.datasets'
   ```
   and run ad-hoc queries against `workflow_runs_stream`, `workflow_events_stream`, `job_runs_stream`, `ingestion_events_stream`, `core_events_stream`.
6. Run the developer validation script to exercise the pipeline end-to-end:
   ```bash
   npm run validate:streaming --workspace @apphub/core
   ```
   This publishes a synthetic workflow event through Core and waits for it to surface in Timestore.

## Failure Recovery

### Broker outage (Redpanda)

1. Alert: `vectorized_cluster_health_status` or `apphub_streaming_backlog_seconds` will fire (`PagerDuty` + `#apphub-ops`).
2. Inspect broker state: `kubectl logs statefulset/apphub-redpanda -n apphub-system` or `docker logs redpanda`.
3. If the pod crashed, restart sequentially (`kubectl rollout restart statefulset/apphub-redpanda`). Wait for leadership to stabilise (`rpk cluster info`).
4. After recovery, ensure `/streaming/status` reports `broker.reachable=true` and backlog gauges fall towards zero.
5. If data loss suspected, trigger partition reassignment or restore from the latest S3 snapshot (see `docs/redpanda.md#operational-checklist`).

### Micro-batcher failures

1. Alert: `timestore_streaming_flush_duration_seconds` > p95 or connectors stuck (`Streaming micro-batchers degraded`).
2. Check Timestore logs for connector errors (`npm run dev --workspace @apphub/timestore` logs or `journalctl` in prod).
3. Flush in-flight windows by restarting the streaming workers (`pkill -f timestore && npm run dev --workspace @apphub/timestore`) or redeploying the pod (`kubectl rollout restart deployment/apphub-timestore -n apphub-system`).
4. Confirm `apps/cli status` shows `batchers: N/N running` and backlog gauges decay.

### Flink checkpoint restore

1. Alert: `flink_jobmanager_completed_checkpoints_total` stalls or `flink_checkpoint_failed_total` spikes.
2. Trigger savepoint for inspection (if JobManager reachable):
   ```bash
   curl -X POST "$APPHUB_FLINK_REST_URL/jobs/<jobId>/savepoints" \
     -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
     -d '{"target-directory": "s3://apphub-flink-checkpoints/savepoints"}'
   ```
3. Restart job from last successful checkpoint or savepoint:
   ```bash
   flink run-application \
     --target kubernetes-application \
     --fromSavepoint s3://apphub-flink-checkpoints/savepoints/<id> \
     -Dkubernetes.cluster-id=apphub-flink \
     gs://apphub-streaming-jobs/tumbling-window.jar
   ```
4. After restart, watch `/streaming/status` (`hotBuffer.state`) and `timestore_streaming_backlog_seconds` to ensure backlog clears.

## Capacity Planning

Track these signals to resize streaming components:

- **Topic lag** – `timestore_streaming_backlog_seconds` > 120s (add batchers) or `vectorized_kafka_partition_under_replicated` (scale brokers).
- **Flush throughput** – `timestore_streaming_flush_duration_seconds` and `timestore_streaming_flush_rows` (increase batch parallelism or window size).
- **Hot buffer footprint** – `timestore_streaming_hot_buffer_rows` and `timestore_streaming_hot_buffer_staleness_seconds` (tune `maxTotalRows`, `retentionSeconds`).
- **Flink checkpoints** – `flink_jobmanager_job_last_checkpoint_duration` and `flink_jobmanager_checkpoint_failed_total` (scale TaskManagers or widen checkpoint interval).
- **Mirror health** – `apphub_stream_mirror_publish_total{result="failure"}` and `apphub_stream_mirror_publish_duration_ms` (persistent failures indicate broker or schema issues). The `publisher` block in `/readyz` exposes the last success/failure timestamps; investigate if failures increase or the last success timestamp stalls.

Dashboards should graph the mirror counters alongside batcher metrics so incidents involving Kafka mirrors are visible alongside ingest lag.

Reassess quotas monthly or after onboarding a workload that emits >50k events/minute. Update `TIMESTORE_STREAMING_BATCHERS` window sizes and Redpanda retention accordingly.
