docs/e2e-and-benchmarks.md, before:

# End-to-End Smoke Tests & Benchmarks

The repository ships a full-stack smoke test and lightweight benchmark harness that exercise the environmental observatory scenario via the published OpenAPI contracts.

## Prerequisites
- Docker Engine for launching Postgres, Redis, and MinIO
- Node.js environment with workspace dependencies installed (`npm install`)
- Local ports `5432`, `6379`, `9000`, `4000`, `4100`, `4200`, and `4300` available

Set `APPHUB_E2E_SKIP_STACK=1` if you want to reuse an already running container stack instead of letting the harness manage Docker Compose lifecycle.

## Smoke Test
```
npm run e2e
```
The runner:
- Builds and starts the AppHub services alongside Postgres, Redis, and MinIO via `docker compose`
- Materialises the observatory module configuration and deploys bundles/workflows with the generator schedule disabled
- Drives the Core, Filestore, Metastore, and Timestore services through their OpenAPI endpoints to verify health and a generator workflow run

Services are published on high ports (`4400`, `4410`, `4420`, `4430`) so the smoke test can run alongside a local `npm run dev` session without fighting for the default development ports.

All processes are torn down automatically unless `APPHUB_E2E_SKIP_STACK=1` is set.

## Benchmark Suite
```
npm run bench
```
The benchmark harness reuses the same bootstrapping flow, warms the observatory pipeline with a manual generator run, and records latency statistics for a curated set of read-heavy API calls across services. Results are written to `benchmarks/observatory.json` with average, min/max, and p95 timings for each scenario.

You can inspect console output for a quick summary or compare JSON snapshots between runs to watch for regressions.

Commit message:

refactor: collapse observatory legacy scaffolding (#141)
* refactor: collapse observatory legacy scaffolding

* feat: add managed secrets service (#136)

* feat: add managed secrets service

* feat: add streaming infrastructure scaffolding (#137)

Co-authored-by: Benedikt Wimmer <bene@Mac.home>

* feat: add streaming infrastructure scaffolding (#137)

Co-authored-by: Benedikt Wimmer <bene@Mac.home>

* feat: add streaming infrastructure scaffolding (#137)

Co-authored-by: Benedikt Wimmer <bene@Mac.home>

---------

Co-authored-by: Benedikt Wimmer <bene@Mac.home>

* refactor: collapse observatory legacy scaffolding

* fix(cli): reuse module defaults for config generation

* feat: add managed secrets service (#136)

* feat: add managed secrets service

* feat: add streaming infrastructure scaffolding (#137)

Co-authored-by: Benedikt Wimmer <bene@Mac.home>

* feat: add streaming infrastructure scaffolding (#137)

Co-authored-by: Benedikt Wimmer <bene@Mac.home>

* feat: add streaming infrastructure scaffolding (#137)

Co-authored-by: Benedikt Wimmer <bene@Mac.home>

---------

Co-authored-by: Benedikt Wimmer <bene@Mac.home>

* refactor: collapse observatory legacy scaffolding

* feat: add managed secrets service (#136)

* feat: add managed secrets service

* feat: add streaming infrastructure scaffolding (#137)

Co-authored-by: Benedikt Wimmer <bene@Mac.home>

* feat: add streaming infrastructure scaffolding (#137)

Co-authored-by: Benedikt Wimmer <bene@Mac.home>

* feat: add streaming infrastructure scaffolding (#137)

Co-authored-by: Benedikt Wimmer <bene@Mac.home>

---------

Co-authored-by: Benedikt Wimmer <bene@Mac.home>

* refactor: collapse observatory legacy scaffolding

* chore: clean package-lock after conflict

---------

Co-authored-by: Benedikt Wimmer <bene@Mac.home>

docs/e2e-and-benchmarks.md, after:

# Environmental Observatory End-to-End Test

The repository ships a reusable end-to-end harness that stands up the complete AppHub stack, deploys the environmental observatory module, and exercises the full ingest → timestore → dashboard → report pipeline.

## Prerequisites
- Docker Engine (≥ 20.10) for Postgres, Redis, MinIO, and the AppHub services defined in `docker/observatory-e2e.compose.yml`
- Node.js workspace with dependencies installed (`npm install`)
- Local high ports `4400`, `4410`, `4420`, `4430`, and `9400` available

## Running the test
```bash
npm run e2e
```
The script:
- Builds the observatory module so fresh bundles, deployment code, and manifests are available
- Boots the Docker Compose stack unless `APPHUB_E2E_SKIP_STACK=1`
- Deploys the module via `apphub module deploy`, materialising configuration in a temporary scratch directory
- Triggers the synthetic generator workflow and waits for ingest, aggregation, and publication workflows to complete
- Verifies Filestore/Timestore output and proxies health checks for the dashboard and admin services through the Core API
- Captures container logs and fails if error-level entries are found. Logs are persisted to `logs/observatory-e2e.log` for inspection

### Useful environment variables
- `APPHUB_E2E_SKIP_STACK=1` — reuse an existing stack instead of calling `docker compose up`
- `APPHUB_E2E_OPERATOR_TOKEN` — override the default bearer token (`apphub-e2e-operator`)
- `APPHUB_E2E_CORE_PORT`, `APPHUB_E2E_FILESTORE_PORT`, etc. — remap published ports if defaults conflict with your environment

### Cleaning up
When the harness launches the stack it automatically runs `docker compose down --volumes` during teardown. If you bring your own stack, set `APPHUB_E2E_SKIP_STACK=1` so the harness leaves existing containers untouched.

### Logs and artifacts
Logs live in `logs/observatory-e2e.log`. Temporary configuration and data land under your system temp directory (`apphub-observatory-e2e-*`) and are removed automatically after the test finishes.
