docs/environment-config.md, before:

# Environment Configuration

The AppHub services now share a single configuration loader built on top of `zod` and exposed from `@apphub/shared/envConfig`. The helper normalises boolean and numeric inputs, supports defaults, and emits consistent error messages when required variables are missing or malformed.

## Helper Usage

```ts
import { booleanVar, integerVar, loadEnvConfig, stringVar } from '@apphub/shared/envConfig';
import { z } from 'zod';

const exampleEnvSchema = z
  .object({
    FEATURE_FLAG: booleanVar({ defaultValue: false }),
    WORKER_CONCURRENCY: integerVar({ defaultValue: 4, min: 1 }),
    API_BASE_URL: stringVar({ defaultValue: 'http://127.0.0.1:4000' })
  })
  .passthrough();

type ExampleEnv = z.infer<typeof exampleEnvSchema>;

export function loadExampleConfig(): ExampleEnv {
  return loadEnvConfig(exampleEnvSchema, { context: 'example-service' });
}
```

All parsers trim whitespace, de-duplicate list entries, and lower-case values when appropriate. Invalid values raise an `EnvConfigError` with a consolidated bullet list that includes the failing variable name.

## Core Service (auth)

| Variable | Default | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `APPHUB_AUTH_DISABLED` | `false` | Enables auth when omitted; accepts `yes/no`, `on/off`, `1/0`. |
| `APPHUB_SESSION_TTL_SECONDS` | `43200` | Validates positive integers and surfaces parse errors. |
| `APPHUB_SESSION_COOKIE_SECURE` | `NODE_ENV !== 'development'` | Explicit `true/false` overrides the environment-sensitive default. |
| `APPHUB_LEGACY_OPERATOR_TOKENS` | `true` | Consistent boolean parsing shared with other services. |
| `APPHUB_OIDC_ALLOWED_DOMAINS` | `[]` | Normalised, lower-case set with duplicates removed. |

The `getAuthConfig` loader and associated tests (`services/core/tests/authConfig.test.ts`) cover boolean coercion, numeric fallbacks, and invalid inputs.

## Metastore Service

| Variable | Default | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `FILESTORE_REDIS_URL` / `REDIS_URL` | `redis://127.0.0.1:6379` (non-prod) | Normalised to a `redis://` URL; missing values in production raise a descriptive error. |
| `APPHUB_ALLOW_INLINE_MODE` | `false` | Required for `FILESTORE_REDIS_URL=inline`; errors mention the toggle when absent. |
| `APPHUB_METASTORE_PGPOOL_MAX` | `5` | Uses shared integer parser with lower bound enforcement. |
| `APPHUB_METASTORE_SCHEMA_CACHE_*` | `300/60/60/30` seconds | Converted to milliseconds and validated as non-negative. |
| `APPHUB_METASTORE_TOKENS` | `[]` | Parsed from JSON once and reused across refreshes. |

Metastore-specific tests (`services/metastore/tests/unit/serviceConfig.test.ts`) exercise inline mode toggles, Redis validation, and token parsing via the shared helper.

## Adding New Configuration

1. Declare expected variables in your service with `z.object({ ... }).passthrough()`.
2. Use `booleanVar`, `integerVar`, `numberVar`, `stringVar`, or the set/list helpers to capture defaults and bounds.
3. Call `loadEnvConfig(schema, { context: 'service-name' })` to parse the active environment.
4. Prefer derived transforms (`schema.transform`) to shape the final config object and keep defaults colocalised.

This pattern keeps configuration logic in one place, eliminates bespoke parsers, and ensures operators receive consistent error messages across services.

Commit message:

feat: add staging observability metrics

docs/environment-config.md, after:

# Environment Configuration

The AppHub services now share a single configuration loader built on top of `zod` and exposed from `@apphub/shared/envConfig`. The helper normalises boolean and numeric inputs, supports defaults, and emits consistent error messages when required variables are missing or malformed.

## Helper Usage

```ts
import { booleanVar, integerVar, loadEnvConfig, stringVar } from '@apphub/shared/envConfig';
import { z } from 'zod';

const exampleEnvSchema = z
  .object({
    FEATURE_FLAG: booleanVar({ defaultValue: false }),
    WORKER_CONCURRENCY: integerVar({ defaultValue: 4, min: 1 }),
    API_BASE_URL: stringVar({ defaultValue: 'http://127.0.0.1:4000' })
  })
  .passthrough();

type ExampleEnv = z.infer<typeof exampleEnvSchema>;

export function loadExampleConfig(): ExampleEnv {
  return loadEnvConfig(exampleEnvSchema, { context: 'example-service' });
}
```

All parsers trim whitespace, de-duplicate list entries, and lower-case values when appropriate. Invalid values raise an `EnvConfigError` with a consolidated bullet list that includes the failing variable name.

## Core Service (auth)

| Variable | Default | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `APPHUB_AUTH_DISABLED` | `false` | Enables auth when omitted; accepts `yes/no`, `on/off`, `1/0`. |
| `APPHUB_SESSION_TTL_SECONDS` | `43200` | Validates positive integers and surfaces parse errors. |
| `APPHUB_SESSION_COOKIE_SECURE` | `NODE_ENV !== 'development'` | Explicit `true/false` overrides the environment-sensitive default. |
| `APPHUB_LEGACY_OPERATOR_TOKENS` | `true` | Consistent boolean parsing shared with other services. |
| `APPHUB_OIDC_ALLOWED_DOMAINS` | `[]` | Normalised, lower-case set with duplicates removed. |

The `getAuthConfig` loader and associated tests (`services/core/tests/authConfig.test.ts`) cover boolean coercion, numeric fallbacks, and invalid inputs.

## Metastore Service

| Variable | Default | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `FILESTORE_REDIS_URL` / `REDIS_URL` | `redis://127.0.0.1:6379` (non-prod) | Normalised to a `redis://` URL; missing values in production raise a descriptive error. |
| `APPHUB_ALLOW_INLINE_MODE` | `false` | Required for `FILESTORE_REDIS_URL=inline`; errors mention the toggle when absent. |
| `APPHUB_METASTORE_PGPOOL_MAX` | `5` | Uses shared integer parser with lower bound enforcement. |
| `APPHUB_METASTORE_SCHEMA_CACHE_*` | `300/60/60/30` seconds | Converted to milliseconds and validated as non-negative. |
| `APPHUB_METASTORE_TOKENS` | `[]` | Parsed from JSON once and reused across refreshes. |

Metastore-specific tests (`services/metastore/tests/unit/serviceConfig.test.ts`) exercise inline mode toggles, Redis validation, and token parsing via the shared helper.

## Timestore Service

| Variable | Default | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `TIMESTORE_STAGING_DIRECTORY` | `<repo>/services/data/timestore/staging` | Root path for DuckDB staging files; created on boot if missing. |
| `TIMESTORE_STAGING_MAX_DATASET_BYTES` | `536_870_912` (512 MiB) | Per-dataset guardrail; `0` disables the warning. Pair with `timestore_staging_disk_usage_bytes`. |
| `TIMESTORE_STAGING_MAX_TOTAL_BYTES` | `0` | Global staging footprint ceiling. `0` leaves the global check disabled. |
| `TIMESTORE_STAGING_MAX_PENDING` | `64` | In-memory queue depth per dataset before new batches are rejected. |
| `TIMESTORE_STAGING_FLUSH_MAX_ROWS` | `50_000` | Flush trigger when staged rows exceed the threshold. `0` disables the row-based trigger. |
| `TIMESTORE_STAGING_FLUSH_MAX_BYTES` | `134_217_728` (128 MiB) | Flush trigger based on DuckDB on-disk size. `0` disables the byte trigger. |
| `TIMESTORE_STAGING_FLUSH_MAX_AGE_MS` | `60_000` (60s) | Flush trigger when the oldest batch waits longer than the threshold. `0` flushes eagerly whenever staging is non-empty. |

Datasets can override the flush thresholds via metadata (`dataset.metadata.staging.flush`). Operators should document the overrides alongside alert thresholds so dashboards reflect the effective limits.

## Adding New Configuration

1. Declare expected variables in your service with `z.object({ ... }).passthrough()`.
2. Use `booleanVar`, `integerVar`, `numberVar`, `stringVar`, or the set/list helpers to capture defaults and bounds.
3. Call `loadEnvConfig(schema, { context: 'service-name' })` to parse the active environment.
4. Prefer derived transforms (`schema.transform`) to shape the final config object and keep defaults colocalised.

This pattern keeps configuration logic in one place, eliminates bespoke parsers, and ensures operators receive consistent error messages across services.
